So let's talk about some of the out of the ordinary things with Java operators.
So I mentioned the unary numeric promotion in the last few videos.
If the top of operand is smaller than an int then it's promoted to an int before applying the operator.
With the exception of the increment/decrement operators.
So let's actually test this out.
We're going to create a new class in our private project we'll call it operator oddities
so this code has got a main method which uses a local variable type inference variable to accept the
result of a unary plus operation and a method which evaluates the type of the variable passed to it
to determine which type was returned from the operation.
You can see that method there.
So let's actually run that
You can see in this case byte 2 which was passed to the method comes back as an int.
Again I mentioned that previously, unary operators promote values to an int before executing on them.
This is hard to remember when looking at code on the certification exam and even more difficult numeric
promotion to catch on an exam question, I think.
It's this code here that I'm about to post in
So I'm looking at this code.
I think you'd agree it looks perfectly reasonable.
But if the exam question was assigning the value of the unary minus expression to a byte variable
it would actually result in a compiler error. Let me actually run this. It should come back there as an int in here
as well. So let's try a simple math example. I've got some code now which adds a byte value to a short value
on the code, you can see there a short editor byte doesn't get promoted to a short. It, in fact, gets promoted
to an int.
Another example dealing with a long
Now think about that what would you expect the answer for this one to come back at? In other words what will
be the type.
Let's run it and see. Result2 is a double. Did that one get you?
Perhaps you forgot that the one point zero literally is a double and not a float.
So it can be very confusing when your expression is using the same variable multiple times and the post
fix or prefix increment/decrement operators are being used on them.
So look at this interesting chart. Do any of these results surprise you?
I'd suggest don't try to memorize it.
What we're gonna do is walk through some sample code that test the veracity of each of these statements.
So you can see that we've got the expression minus minus number minus number minus minus the result is always
zero.
Next one number minus minus, minus, minus minus number result is always two. So we've got number minus minus in parentheses
is equal to parentheses number plus equal one.
Well that actually evaluates to true.
And the fourth one int number equals 10 number equals number minus minus.
So the final value in number at this point is 10. Alright
so let's create another class and go through some of this code. We'll call this one More Oddities
And you can see that this first test that we're doing here is a result equals minus minus number minus number minus
minus. The comment on line 13.
The result always results to zero.
I've been testing a couple of instances as you could see they were for loops.
So let's run this and we can see in that case despite us having a loop there, the result is always zero.
So why is it zero?
Well exploring the first iteration, number equals i, i equals 10.
number equals 10.
result in equals minus minus number minus number minus minus.
So we evaluate values left to right the result in equals number minus number minus minus.
So in other words number gets assigned the value of nine from the prefix decrement operator result in equals
nine take parentheses nine. Number gets assigned the value of eight from the postfix decrement operator
but after this math is done result equals zero number equals eight
So a bit confusing there
So I'm looking back at that table that I showed you
Let's look at the next expression in that table and that's int result equals number minus minus, minus,
Minus minus number. A few minuses there. So I'll paste this code in outside of the for loop.
Okay there's the code. Second test.
Let's run this. You can see that second test the result is 2. So let's go through the same process as before
but this one I think is a little harder to grasp.
We have to remember that subsequent references to the same variable in a single expression will result
in the post decrement or increment occurring on those variables before they are further evaluated in
expressions. The number equals i, i equals 10.
number equals 10 is what we're starting with.
then we've got result equals number minus minus, minus, minus minus number
So we're evaluating left to right the result equals 10 in parentheses but number is now nine minus minus
minus number.
So the result equals 10 minus and minus minus nine in parentheses.
result equals ten take eight, result equals 2. A bit confusing.
I think one more example will help train you to evaluate left to right populating the next reference of the
variable accordingly. So I'm pasting a third test here.
Okay, so there's the third test. So let's run it first and see the results and we'll go through them. And you can see the result
equals minus seventy one and minus 341. Alright so
let's step through the expression left to right for the first iteration evaluating left to right as
before and adding multiplicity precedents after the values are known. So result equals number minus minus
minus number plus plus multiplied by minus minus number. It takes a bit to get your head around. Result equals
10 the number is now 9 after the postfix decrement minus number plus plus multiplied by minus minus
number.
So the result is now ten take nine number is now ten after the postfix increment multiplied by minus
minus number. Result equals ten minus nine multiplied by minus minus ten in parentheses. Result equals
ten minus nine times nine. Result equals ten minus eighty-one and therefore the result equals minus
seventy one which we got.
So hopefully that helped. Finally, let's explore the last two rows from our slide again. This one.
So back to the code. We'll paste some more code.
Okay so there's a code for our fourth test. Let's run this
all right.
So the fourth test there isequal equal true and number equals 10. So evaluating left to right again isequal
equals in parentheses number minus minus isequal to parentheses number plus equal 1. Evaluating left to
right isequal equals 10 now in parentheses but number is nine now isequal to number plus equal one
in parentheses so isequal equals ten is equal to nine in parentheses plus equal 1.
So finally isequal equals 10 equals equals 10 hence the value true. Alright so looking at our chart again
let's look at the final test. Copy and paste the code for that. Okay there's the code for the final test.
Run the code. We get number equals ten so the variable number is assigned to value ten and the postfix
decrement never occurs because the assignment interrupted the decrement. So you may find some of these
confusing chains of increments and decrements of expressions on the exam or in loops. Slow down and write
it down is the best advice I can give you. Take it step by step as you saw here.
All right so let's finish the video here and in the next one we'll give you a short quiz and then we'll
start talking in the next section of the course about decision constructs.
So, see you in the next quiz or next section of the course.